Guys just before we get into today's video,
I do wanna give a quick plug to a very new channel that I'm working on.
It's a business theme channel,
and we cover topics like why the 50 pound note in the UK is pretty much just for
criminals,
why us public transport sucked so bad and things like that actually recently
made a video on that channel about this guy who wanted to invent this sock that
would prevent trench foot,
that ended up making something completely different and kind useless.
And I wanna play you a clip from that video, but before we do,
I'll just say that it's quite different to my normal stuff.
Like the stuff on this channel.
And if you want me to just give you the facts really straight and you hate fun,
you're not gonna like this new channel,
but if you like facts and if you like fun, you'll probably like it.
Here's a quick clip.
Can you imagine like working for like the department of defense or whatever,
and it's like, we've got this huge medical problem.
People's feet are rotting off in the trenches and it's like, what's his face?
Edgar's like, yeah, yeah, I'll fix that.
I'm gonna go and meant something for that.
He comes about like a month later and he is like, gentlemen,
I present to you the water bomb.
He had utterly failed in his find a prevention for trench foot,
but he immediately became inspired to invent water balloon toys for children,
which sounds like loads, more fun.
I'm sure he is into all the people in the trenches who are like my face,
but on my feet, Edgar. So if you like that, please do click below,
go subscribe three times a week on that channel. And let's get into the video.
Smith of vampire is as old as time itself.
And many incarnations of this demonic creature are found in almost every
culture. And when we think about vampires today,
one novel cast sits shadow over legions of imitators,
Dracula, the unde one, man, a former civil servant theater manager,
and part-time writer condensed into one single worker fiction,
all VAM Peric law. As we know it today, this is the story of bra Stoker.
What came before and after Dracula Rand's water relationship in particular may
have given him the inspiration he needed to resurrect the vampire.
Abraham bra Stoker was born in Clint,
a near Dublin islands on November the eighth, 1847.
He was the third out of seven children in a Protestant family. At that time,
Irelands was of course still part of the United Kingdom and both his father and
his eldest brother served as loyal civil servants to the crown bra was a sickly
child and spent most of his time housebound or bedridden until the age of seven.
His youthful imagination was influenced by real life tales of death disease
misery.
He was born during the terrible potato famine as though his relatively healthy
family did not suffer directly.
They undoubtedly would've felt its societal effect.
Bra also spent much time listening to the stories told by his mother Charlottes
about the color epidemic of 1832,
which claimed thousands of lives rather eventually overcame his poor health and
grew up to be a tall athletic youth crowned by a head of bright red hair after
secondary school bra enrolled at Trinity college in Dublin,
where he made a reputation as both an excellent student and an athlete.
He won prizes in several track and field disciplines and was also a keen row and
rugby player. Despite his size.
He developed a notable agility perform on the rings and the trape in 1870.
He graduated with honors in science and mathematics,
but he also studied a Retary and history. After graduating,
he entered the Irish civil service where he served for 10 years as inspector of
the petty sessions,
the petty sessions were 600 magistrates court scattered all over Ireland,
dealing with minor pen Norland civil cases.
Stoker's task was to oversee that they functioned correctly. Yay, mammoth task.
Certainly despite the heavy workload,
the young civil servants found the time to vent his passion for writing and
succeeded in publishing some short stories in 1870, such as the crystal carbon,
1872 and his first horror tale,
the chain of death in 1875 during the same year,
Stoker also penned his first novel,
the Primrose path serialized in the magazine. The Shamrock,
the work is a melodrama about an honest carpenter from Dublin who moves to
London to work at a rundown theater.
There are no horror or supernatural elements here.
Just a vivid description of how a good man can be brought down by the evils of
alcohol. Stoker's writing extended into nonfiction. By the end of the decade,
after years of managing the petty sessions,
brown felt the need to write a sort of manual for the court clerks. So in 1879,
he published the duties of clerks of petty sessions in Ireland.
This book may sound dull to those who are not passionate about law,
but there is an interest thing section about the treatment of dangerous LUN in
court, maybe an early inspiration for some of DRS characters, perhaps,
maybe Renfield and Dr. Seaward during his decade in the civil service,
the energetic bra also indulged in a love for drama and theater inherited from
his parents.
His knowledge of the stage was sufficient and enough that he landed a side gig
as a to critic for the Dublin male, his writing extended to other genres.
And he published an article defending Walter Whitman's collection of poems
leaves of grass,
which was considered controversial at the time brown Woodley meet and befriend
Whitman. One of many literary Jans to form a bond with stoke app,
their friendship. It started with a controversial letter,
but more on that bit later in 1876,
bra Stoker met for the first time, the famous actor, Henry Irving,
the actor had read some of Stoker's favorable reviews of him and wanted to meet
the critic. The two became close friends,
starting a relationship that would change Stoker's life.
Now we don't know if any of Brown's romantic relationships until this point,
but he would soon catch up.
Bra became entangled in a love triangle with a girl called Florence Balcom,
the third vertex of the triangle. Well,
that was none other than fellow Irish author, Oscar wild in 1878,
Florence made up her mind.
She chose bra over Oscar and as the two married on the 4th of December,
but Stoker and wild they've actually remained good friends with brand being a
regular in Oscar's literary circle.
Now we may be looking too hard for clues here,
but isn't there a similar situation in Dr. When Nina's friend Lucy is courted
by Dr. Seawood Quincy Morris and Lord Homewood with the three remaining good
friends, despite their romantic rivalry.
While that same Henry eing invited Stoker to London with a job offer becoming
his manager, Braley accepted,
running the affairs of both Irving and his theater. The, I see him,
their working relationship. It continued until Irving's death in 1905.
For the moment though, let's stick to the stokers in 1879,
they welcomed their only child Irving null named after his godfather,
Henry Irving. The boy's birth must have inspired. Stoker is three years later.
He published under the sunset, a collection of tales for children in 1890,
Stoker published his second full length novel entitled the snakes pass.
This is the only of Stokes works to be set in his native islands.
And one can see the shadow of supernatural elements beginning to creep in,
as we follow a young English and his quest for a treasure,
supposedly hidden by St. Patrick after his battle with the king of snakes,
the novel also delivers subtle hints,
rebuke king English intrusion in Irish society.
Even as a former loyal civil servant Stoker did not hide his support for Irish
home rule, then eventual independence from the United Kingdom.
It was only after the snakes pass was published.
The am Stoker began working on his imortal masterpiece Dracula.
I've already hinted at a couple of possible real life inspirations for the
novel,
but it's time now to look at the man who may have possibly inspired the count
himself Stoker's employer and friend Henry Irving
Stoker first met Henry Irving in 1876,
but his first written review of the Sian dates back to 1871,
after seeing him perform in the play,
the two roses Stoker wrote a sharp critique of the performance that he would
eventually deny penning and later writings by 76 Ivin was Britain's top actor
working as the leading star of English drama.
After a performance of Hamlet in Dublin,
Irving was flattered by Stoker's review and invited him to supp bra and Henry
clicked immediately and made plans to dine together again.
During the second dinner, Irving performed his piece to resist sauce.
Thomas Hood's poem,
dream of Eugene a the delivery was so electrifying that bra apparently
bloated into violent hysterics. The writer was now enthralled by the performer.
Brown later wrote then began the close friendship between us,
which only terminated with his life if indeed friendship like any other form
of love can of a terminate from that hour began a friendship as profound,
as close as lasting as can be between two men,
their professional relationship though, that started two years later in 1878,
when Irving took ownership of the li theater in London and invited Stok to join
him,
he would manage both the theater and Henry's career on the 14th of December 10
days after marrying Florence, Bram eagerly accepted the invitation,
and he moved to London. This move suited both new, new ADSS.
Bram was eager to establish fruitful connections for his literary career.
While Florence was looking forward to leaving a mark on London's social scene,
Bram threw himself with such energy and dedication into the new managerial work.
That it's a wonder that he could do some creative writing on the site. In fact,
he spent most of his time writing letters on Irving's behalf,
even up to 60 a day,
sorting out the daily admin tasks required by the theater or less often acting
as tour manager for having himself so's passion and skills did not go
unnoticed. Even newspapers of the time,
usually more focused on the star act rather than their own Sage celebrated Bram.
The Chicago daily news in 1888 wrote Mr. A's great success in this country has
been due to a very considerable extent to the Shrew management of bra Stoker.
We know of no manager, more vigilance, more indefatigable,
more audacious than he having is fortunate in having so able
and so loyal and associate while the English newspaper Northern E wondered what
Henry would do without this Trojan, whose ubiquity is astounding.
But what about the other side of this relationship?
Did Irving appreciate Brams friendship and hard work?
We know that two months before Bram had started working for having the act
Stewart sent a letter signed with love in great haste Henry the following week,
I haven't signed again with love, but by August, 1879,
eight months after Irving had hired Stoker,
his letters were signed plainly with your sincerely, this downgrade,
maybe a reflection of more formal relations between the two now regulated by a
boss employee dynamic. But it's sad to note that even in the workplace,
having seemed to have little consideration for Stoker while newspapers
attributed much of the actor success to Stoks management,
the ICM theater programs with list bra only on page four,
well below other employees, such as the stage manager and musical director.
This lack of appreciation have been in line with Irving's personality as
described by stoke as biographer Barbara Beford by all accounts,
Henry Aing had a charming even mesmerizing personality. Most of all,
he had a huge ego. This not only made he made demanding employer,
but someone who in general depleted the positive energy of those around him
today, we would describe him as having a toxic personality,
probably with a narcissistic personality disorder thrown in as well.
And yet brown never said or wrote anything negative about Irving in his later
reminiscences. He even praised at great length,
the mind and the body of the actor, writing that up to the age of 60,
he was compact of steel and whip core.
His energy and nervous power were such as only came from a great brain.
And the muscular force of that lean live body must have been
extraordinary. Excellent SAS.
This one have led to speculation on whether Bram Stoker was a closeted gay man
in the marriage of convenience with Florence,
but actually rather in love with his actor friend and employer,
the questions will remain unanswered as there is no certain proof of Stoker's
true sexual preferences. However, prior to the Irving years,
one particular piece of writing could be seen as proof of Stoker's homosexuality
or bisexuality on Valentine's day,
1876 Bram wrote a letter to American poet,
Walt Whitman himself rued to be a homosexual law bisexual man
Stoker's letter was to express his ecstatic admiration at the collection of
poems leaves of grass.
The last paragraph reads as such how sweeter thing it is for a strong,
healthy man with a woman's eye and a child's wish is do you feel that he can
speak to a man who can be,
if he wishes father and brother and wife to his soul?
I don't think you will laugh. Walt Witchman nor despise me, but at all events,
I thank you for all the love and sympathy you have given me in common with my
kind, the phrase, a woman's eye may be a clue, but again, <affirmative>,
there is not concrete evidence. If soca was a closeted homosexual,
this would only add to his anxiety and sense of inadequacy.
Let's not forget that homosexuality was still considered a crime in Victorian
Britain. These feelings,
at least according to one critic may have also crept up and Bran's most famous
novel.
So let's take a look at how Dracula aim to be and how it can be interpreted
By the early 1890s. Brown was still working at the ly theater.
His financial position should have been stable. In theory, in practice,
we know that it lost much of his savings in two failed investments.
One them promoted by American novelist, mark Twain. In those same years,
he had started working on a novel that would sort out his financial ways,
but more importantly, make him an imortal author Dracula,
which was first published by archable Constable in 1897 is so well known that I
probably don't need to recap the story for you. If you haven't read it yet,
it's available for three and we're gonna link to that below.
So what inspired the character's plot and themes of Dracula on literary level?
The 19th century had already offered some examples of vampire fiction,
18 nineteens the vampire by John Paul Dory first introduces the trope of the
vampire is a mysterious and charming Aris Tora with a mesmerizing whose
victims find him difficult to resist on a more graphic level.
It was the 1845 Gothic serial Vanny.
The vampire that popularized the idea of vampires having fangs and leaving bite
marks on their victims. Necks finally, car Miller by fellow Irish,
author Sheridan,
Lafa attributed to vampires the power to metamor into animals and popularized
concept of a vampire expert who knows the secrets to slay the unde
more subtle.
I Lafa introduced the concept of VAM as a metaphor for seduction or even
just for intercourse. One of many interpretations of Dr. Envisions,
this character is a sexual predator who fixate on female victims,
Stoker combined all these elements with other aspects of vampire law,
establishing the definitive collection of vampire cliches perpetuated by horror
literature, the aversion to garlic, crucifixes mirrors and roses,
vulnerability to sunlight and wooden sticks, power over wolves, bats,
even storms that need to rest in a coffin filled with a dirt from the
motherland. Everything that we know about vampires today,
we owed a Dracula besides preexisting vampire fiction,
Stoker acknowledged other sources of inspiration.
The assay Tavian superstitions by Emily ARDS.
The book of Wells by Reverend Sabine baring jar's book in
particular may have inspired Stoker to settle on trave as the home of the Ko.
Finally,
Irish folklore may have played a part in stirring Stoker's tastes towards the
supernatural ran himself reported.
Growing up on traditional tales told by his mother of Banies changelings
malicious pixes,
and shapeshifters who trick humans into giving them their souls.
In addition to literary predecessors, Stoker, conjured,
plot points and character features from real life.
And I've already mentioned a couple of events which may have ended up in his
masterpiece as for the protagonist.
It is certain that VLA tope DRAL the military leader was a key influence on
the sang nature of Dracula. The vampire.
This is a even acknowledged in the novel when Dracula mentions his wars against
the Ottoman invaders and the betrayal of his brother Rady,
but a big stamp on Dracula's appearance and personality almost certainly came
from Henry Irving. What did Henry look like? Well, here is brand's description.
His face was a strong,
a very strong Aqualine with high bridge of the in nose and peculiarly arch
nostrils with lofty domed,
forehead and hair growing scantly around the temples, but profusely elsewhere,
his eyebrows were very massive almost meeting over the nose and with bushy hair
that seemed to curl in its own perfusion matches the portrait. Right?
Well, I must confess. I just tricked you.
What I read is a description of Dracula straight from the novel Barbara Beford
again, supports the idea that Irving is count Dr.
Somewhere in the creative process.
Dracula became a sinister caricature of Irving as a mesmerist and depleter
an artist draining those about him to feed his ego. It was a stunning,
but avenging tribute
Stoker's novel is a Keystone of the horror genre.
Not only because of its subject matter, but also because of its style.
The novel is written in an EPIs style as a collection of letters,
telegrams journal entries, even transcripts of wax cylinder recordings.
It's sort of the predecessor to today's found footage, ho flicks,
if you like this star,
wasn't entirely new as Frankenstein by Mary Shelley also relied on journal
entries,
but Stoker's innovation was his ability to multiply the perspectives on the
supernatural events of the story, as well as to make the written records.
Part of the story itself. As one piece of plot developments,
the under Lord tries to destroy the very archived records that are driving the
plot of the actual novel as they could reveal too much about him.
It's a blend of storytelling and plot device is that was extremely ahead of its
time.
The other factor that ensure the novels popular and longevity is the variety of
interpretations to which it lends itself.
According to John Sutherlands of the Irish times,
Stoker was influenced by the moral panic about immigration.
This was something experienced by Victorian society.
At the end of the 19th century,
a Brexit here could summarize the plot as such an illegal immigrants from
Eastern Europe, occupies several squats in London,
hoping to prey on local women that probably wouldn't do much for urban property
values critic.
Paul Murray from Oxford university sees the plot of Dr. As an allegory of male
insecurity and the dangers of subservient to another person could this perhaps
be Irving too. Murray also points out how modern commentators see the novel.
He says deviant and taboo forms of sexuality, including rape incest,
adultery, oral sex group, sex sex during administration, bestiality, pedophilia,
veal disease, and voyeurism among other things.
And at this point we wonder among other things really,
it does seem like you covered everything there.
And it does make it sound a bit as if Stoker used VAM as a thin disguised
portrayal of his sexual proclivities.
Now professor Peus of soton university college has a compelling opposing view
Stoker Oja shortly after his friend,
Oscar wild had been tried and sentenced for homosexual acts.
And this may have led the author to view sexuality as a painful source of evil
stating Dracula shows Stoker's suspicions and anxiety,
all forms of sexuality, especially towards those considered to be perverse.
The simple attractions of the count suggest stokers fears about his own
sexuality, stepping away from sex. For one,
you can also find a Marxist allegory in this VAM part,
at least according to Franco MITI of Stanford university,
he argues that the novel was about the crisis of liberal capitalism taking place
within the 1890s, put in jeopardy by the by of monopolies Camra.
Then as a solitary,
despot represents a monopoly capital who increases its power by feeding on and
enslaving the Ariat car marks himself once wrote something that seems to support
this theory saying capital is dead labor,
which vampire like lives only by sucking living labor and lives. The more,
the more labor it sucks.
The publication and early success of Dracula brought enormous attention to Bram
Stoker.
He had clearly got his break and he was going to exploit his intellectual
property as much as possible.
Stoker immediately understood the theatrical potential of his novel.
But before he set off to work on an adaptation,
he decided to stage a public reading at the Lim,
a common tactic to secure copyright for stage purposes.
Brad offered to give Henry Aing the lead role.
It would've been the perfect casting, but he refused.
However he did attend the reading. And what did he think of it? Well,
it was dreadful. This was the start of a rift between the two friends,
the gap widened when Irving son Lawrence joins the Lim company in 1898
as a director and playwrights BA is only natural.
Henry started paying more attention to his son's own advice than stokers
realized that he was being sidelines.
And laed not being able to see Henry as often as before the following year,
raving ignored Stoker's advice not to sell the Eli cm to a limited company three
years after that in 1902, the company declared bankruptcy.
And then I see him had to be shut down on October the 13th, 1905,
Henry eing suffered an onstage stroke and died that very day.
His will did not make any mention of the man who had been his loyal friends and
manager for almost 30 years. Shortly afterwards, Stoker also had a stroke,
but he partially recovered and went on to write a biography about Henry.
It was called personal reminisces of Henry Irving beyond the Irving biography.
Bram had not neglected his fiction. Writing alternating horror with romance.
His novels of mystery and horror include the Juul of seven stars from 1903,
a tale of adventure in romance set in Egypt and the layer of the white worm from
1911.
This is perhaps his most famous this novel beside Dr. As it was popularized by
Ken Russell's film adaptation of 1988,
starring a young pre romcom hug grant layer of the white worm.
There's some similarity to Dracula as victims are found with bite marks on their
necks and the main antagonists.
So scheming aristocrats with supernatural powers,
but here the ultimate fo is a giant worm with glowing eyes,
which is ultimately defeated. Spoiler of that with a lot of dynamite.
Overall,
the plot of the novel is muddled by unnecessary characters and dead end sub
plots, which may have been a consequence of stokers declining health.
He never fully recovered the 1906 stroke. In fact,
Stoker continued to suffer from more strokes as aged until a final one claimed
his life on April the 20th, 1912,
that is at least according to his obituary. According to Daniel Faron,
Stoker's grand nephew,
the death certificate reports as his cause of death locomotor,
a taxi also known in the early 20th century as general paralysis of the insane
a condition associated with, with syphilis Stoker's definitive cause of death.
It's still open to speculation today as is the case with well,
many other aspects of his life.
So what was the true nature of his relationship with Henry Irving and with Walt
Whitman, or maybe even with Oscar wild?
What hidden messages lurk between the lines of his work? Well,
we will never know, but that isn't necessarily a bad thing.
The man left us something more meaningful to focus on a masterpiece called
Dracula,
a mirror disguised as a novel that can show us what we fear or desire
most of all. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below and don't forget to subscribe.
We've got brand new videos just like this four times per week,
Monday through Thursday. So subscribe hit that bell.
See you find out when we put out a new video also,
why not visit our sister channel called geographics?
This channel is about people. That channel is about places.
There is a link to that below and as always, thank you for watching.